You're unfilmables air. So, Winky, they've got their own podcast.
Ah.
Hi. I'm stu willis and welcome to draft zero. Ah, podcast. Where to emerging Endlessly emerging filmmakers try to work out what makes great screenplays work.
And I'm chas fisher.
Or, in the case of this episode, what makes our subpar screenplay Sabah.
You know, Sue is that kind of self deprecation that just loses us so many.
Okay, how we can make our screenplay's great better.
Yes, So as people who know our format well, this is the third and hopefully final entry into our run on unfilmables and unscriptables.
In the first episode, we looked at moments on the page from a number of great writers on.
Then we built on learnings from those moments into Part two, which was how to best on the page recreate those incredible cinematic moments of or,
in on a larger sequence level.
Now this one. You know, we always do our learnings at the end of each episode.
But doing this exercise actually triggered you and I to go and look at, in my case, a project that I'm currently working on and in your case.
A no older couple of projects to go, you know, to actually apply on learnings.
And we thought we would God, this is terrifying.
Analyse our work and our use of unfilmables and what we would do differently as a result of our learnings.
Now you and I, loath to be screenplay gurus And so I feel that us analysing our own work is our way of.
It's like I get out of gaol Free card. We're not telling other great writers how to write better. We are baring our terrible writing for you deal listeners, so hopefully you can learn with us.
You had a go at me for being self deprecating and there, you know, I think what we're actually trying to show is a practical application of what we've weren't.
Okay, so the three screenplays were looking at its one because they're ours.
So the 1st 1 is the feature screenplay off payload.
That was payload was my the graduation film. And then I wrote a feature screenplay with my now longtime collaborator, Matt Clay Field. It was the second script that we had ever ridden together.
So apologies Matt for E ripping into our riding. But I think he's actually got a nod, his head in agreement with what I have to say, because I was the one that was pushing to really stretch back the writing style, the second script.
And so this is a script I've been working on for a while.
The second script we're going looking at is a project of mine called dust bunny, which is the project that I mentioned in the previous episode, and it's for two reasons.
Look, I think it's a good script. I'm going give myself a little bit of a flex. It was nominated for ah Austrian Writers Guild Monty Miller reward. So I know it was pretty solid, though we could never, never get it made because, as you'll see, it's kind of dark or see here it's kind of duck.
But what is interesting is between the first draft and the last draft, I could already see what I had learned between the draft on what was missing. So I want to talk about that.
So what I want to do is highlight a couple of particular scenes that between the first draught and the fourth draft, what I noticed,
is looking back at what I kind of added to script to kind of make it Mohr emotionally engaging because this is a seven page script that hopefully, by the end of that people are crying.
It's kind of going for catharsis within seven pages, which is pretty hard, and I think unfilmables or part of a way of, well, not even unfilmables What I will call emotional context is what can unlock that.
I'm not saying it's the great screenplay in the world, but I will make both the first and the fourth draft available for people to read so they can kind of see how those scenes developed,
and the last project is uncondition.
Yes, unconditional. It's a working title at the moment.
It's a pilot for half hour dramedy that I have been writing over the last year.
And in contrast to you, this is like a middle draft whereabouts.
Take it to market soon and there is a producer attached,
and the lines and the moments that we're going to talk about, the ones that actually the producer,
flagged as things that he didn't like aboutthe script and asked me to fix and how I've where I've agreed where I've no agreed.
And I've learned a lot from these from this podcast, like, you know, because these bogus take so long to produce, I've actually with the 1st 1 I wanted to send it to the producer and go he see listen to thes screenplays and how great they do unfilmables.
And then by the end of it, I'm like, you know what? I think he was right. I think eh was not as great as I thought I was.
Which is good that I mean, that's why we do it. And hopefully what people get out of our episodes.
But beyond talking about our own work, Oh, God, that feels so terrible.
I There's kind of two other segments to this episode, which is a bit strange for us.
Kind of chapters were actually doing some listener questions, and we won't actually start with one of those.
And we're also going to be talking to Carisa, who as you if you've listened to previous two episodes. She did a wonderful job reading the scripts.
But she's an actor and a writer and a dick critic, which is very common.
It's not unusual in Theatre to kind of have all those things intersect.
So to be releasing, to speak to her about her reaction, particularly as an actress in terms of those unfilmables on what she found useful and,
not useful, a cz an actor because some of this is we've talked about its performance beats.
Are they helpful for for an actor all this and more draft zero?
So do you want to start with the first question on Reddit?
No, Actually, I think the best question Teo start with is from Australia and director and producer and one's a film vessels, while Brian Kidd, who sent us a question which is.
Hi. And thank you for covering this very important and some controversial topic. My question is, how can you tell if your unfilmables is good or if you're just being a wanker?
So in light of that, do you want to start with my project? Because it's got the producer pointing out all the moments when my unfilmables are being one curry.
Yes, we should start with your project. But I think in the end she's boiling down.
The reason that we've been doing now three episodes on unfilmables, which is how do I know if I'm being a wanker, right?
Because on the one level, I think it's very easy to go into that super lean and mean riding style with none of it, because you think it makes your riding safe.
But sometimes safe is boring, right?
A CZ. I'm then very fund of saying, fat is where the flavour is, you know so, but you have too much fat and it's a little bit.
Unpleasant.
Well, it doesn't taste good, right? Yeah, too much fat. And it's unpleasant, too little fat, and it's kind of tasteless.
So it's finding that balance in the writing style.
We'll come back to Brian's questions at the end because I think that's going to be just to make you all keep listening, because that's kind of going to be where the muscle and the protein is going to be.
But you have to kind of get through the flavorful fat to get there. Or you could just use the chapter function on your podcast. to skip forward.
Or if you're a Patriot subscriber, you can wait until our episode guides come out.
Nose plugs you.
What we've started doing is thanks to our one of our drugs, your interns God,
we're actually putting out these, like almost 20 page documents that our client edited cut down versions of the transcripts to make it easier to refer back to episodes as we do them much easier than going through a transcript.
But they only go to our patrons because they're the ones who are actually paying for it to get happen.
But there will be like to page recaps available publicly.
But so if you think, like the idea of having a document that you can kind of flip through to refresh your memory.
Or if you just want more draft zero more often, you can find a link to a pigeon in show notes.
Okay, so you're happy to dive into unconditional now.
Yes, yes, yes.
So unconditional working title is a As I said, it's 1/2 hour dramedy about a bitter, elderly, formerly successful Children's book author,
who she was successful in the eighties, writing sort of heteronormative nuclear family parables that aren't selling anymore.
She's run out of royalties. She's going broke, and she has to move in with her gay son, whom she kept in the closet as a teenager because of fear that if everyone knew that her son was gay, no one would buy her books.
So that's the set up. And as she's illustrating these books, the characters, the animals that she's illustrating for these new kids books that she's trying to write, come tto life in her imagination and argue with her.
So they're kind of like a dramatisation off her writer's block.
So that's the setup in Storey World. Hopefully, people have heard that and go, I'd be mildly interested in watching that,
but the first line that got some serious pushback from my wonderful producer, who for the record.
I invited to appear on the podcast to talk to his notes, and he gave us his blessings but politely declined.
But it's also then he gave it. I actually want to say as an outsider to your process the fact that he was willing to let us discuss a in development project on this podcast says is awesome and says a lot about his character, so.
Absolutely. Okay, so the first line that really got his goat on DH.
It's one that I've ended up fully agreeing with incense. Deleting is thie introductory line to the author, whose name is Marc E.
And thus we meet writer illustrator narrator Margie Raffo Sixties. Her ratty cardigan is one wash from disintegrating. Her hair is one wash away from being washed.
Dangling from her lips, a CG cries out to be asked.
On DH and the line. He was fine with all parts of it, except for the line.
Her hair is one wash away from being washed.
So I was, you know, just trying to play on the word wash as we discussed in linking language that wasn't something, that I was conscious of, what I was doing.
But I'm just trying to make a joke in the description. So I was trying to use the big print, too.
Go towards the humerus tone of the piece, but applying one of our lessons from parts one and two.
This the only thing that the audience is going to see is their hair. It might be like greasy or wild or.
E. I have two left us.
The problem I've got as someone who's had long hair for quite a long part of my adult life.
I don't know many people that watched their hair every single day.
Right? My hair today is one wash from being washed. So I read that line and to go to brain thing. It feels like a wanker thing.
And it for two reasons why one it feels because one it makes no sense because it's like you mean she washes it every second day,
but the part that makes it feel quote unquote wangari is that you've used as you've identified, you've used language to kind of make itself contextualising to integrate it, that rhythm of it.
And when I asked you about it, you're like, Well, I love I like the rhythm of it. And I'm like, Yeah, the rhythm has has taken priority over it actually making sense.
Agreed. And well, look, I don't wash my hair every day, either.
The point I was making is her hair is not clean right, and I was trying to be clever about it and the language, even if the language was worth while applying.
The lesson that we identified in parts one and two is that this was only for the reader in terms of the language being used.
It wasn't for you know him and make up because I could have written it simpler for them.
And it certainly wasn't for the actor. And it's certainly not for the audience. And the producers note is verbatim.
Too clever. Disrupts the reed has me wondering whether it's one day slash week slash month since the last wash on playing on words a tad too much.
So as much as I love the line, I have deleted it because from learnings on this podcast, it broke the spell.
It was for the reader and not really for the audience on DH, as you say, is no accurate.
One of the big things that we we identified is when all the amazing script that we read turn toe unfilmables.
It's often because those unfilmables were actually the most efficient way of writing it.
And while they might not have been precise, we while you in particular stumbled upon the idea of being universally specific where they invite the reader to use their imagination.
So it's not a precise description of exactly what you're seeing or what you're hearing, but it is understandable.
Toe all readers. It paints a picture, and this line did not to do that.
But coming just to a workshopping aspect of this.
If you wanted to keep the description about hair because there is a difference between having ready, close and yourself being ready right so you might go. I want to imply that she doesn't take care of a close, but she also doesn't take care of itself.
I would make the linking word ratty her ready. Carding is one wash from disintegrating.
Her ready hair is one cut from being clean.
Something like that. I'm not saying that's an even better life, but I would make that the mirror or the bridge. Find something called her Ready Cardigan is one wash disintegrating.
Her ready hair is 10 washes from bullying. Claim.
Something like that would to may get that link that you are saying and saying she doesn't take care of herself either.
And it's to an extreme, and someone has, unfortunately, had to, like, brush and cut their hair.
For an elderly aunt, it can get in click.
I know exactly what that ready here looks like, right, and I can feel it and I can smell it, and it is actually very evocative, and I think finding a way to do that, which is your instinct would be great.
But the thing is, you've kind of in this version, you've kind of gone for the wordplay, as opposed to betraying. This is someone who does not prioritise their personal hygiene.
Well, it's wordplay over clarity.
And I would go for clarity over wordplay.
Yeah, well, you can't have both. I could just be better. It's not an either or scenario.
Yes,
no. And it's just in hindsight, because what's great about the line in this district?
Credit ready cardigan is a great little kind of snip it because it's the and then the D i g n like there is the sea along aid vows.
But there is a Connexion between those two words that makes that really strong.
And I would try to echo that in the line after That's me putting on my lecturers hat kind of.
But I would say the reason that you put it in there is because you had an instinct about saying that she does not take her personal hygiene very importantly, and you actually lose something by taking it out.
Thank you. The next line is the introduction of her son, and it's on page five.
Storm Fleming knee Raffo thirties barely hides his anguish with a poker face, hipster haircut and a hint of a paunch. Stone clings to the memory of his twenties and his metabolism.
And so when we did our part to friend of the podcast and recurring guest, Julio Leave better identified those unfilmables that cheat by conveying plot information.
Ex positional unfilmables yet.
And this is one of those ones that I actually deliberately cheated because I've never actually written a pilot before.
I'd only ever written features, and I felt the pressure in this pilot to be providing the fuel and seed conflicts for future episodes.
And one of the ways that I did that is when I introduced her son, I said, Storm Fleming, Open brackets, nay, Raffo thirties, close brackets.
And so what I was saying is that her male son has changed his last name from hers, or that he has a different last name from when he was born.
But obviously that is only for the reader.
It's not for the production team. It's not for the actor, really. It's not for the audience. They're not going to know.
I mean last names you can choose to have them or not, because very wrath of people lead with their last names.
So but I was putting it in there to go. You know what is going to become an issue in a later episode, like a source of contention between the sun and the mother that he changed his name to distance himself from her.
Yes, which is great, Which is great shit, too. No and will in presuming this is a TV series.
Stuff that we will learn will unfold.
But the producer also pushed back on it, and I again agreed with him and deleted it because it was a great idea for future episodes.
Let's not interrupt the readers read, Let's not break the spell on. I probably would have kept it if it paid off within this pilot, to be honest, but because I don't pay it off in this pilot, I have since removed it.
I'm not going to say that you should remove it, but if you wanted to keep it, my work's up suggestion was to use something that is closer to unfilmables.
Speak to the reader and tell them exactly, Not exactly, but tell them a condensed version of what you told May Joan told our listeners just then, but essentially point out what you just said.
He has changed his name to not be associated with his month.
This will become clearer over the next few episodes, and I've seen that I've read produced pilot,
last night, and they will specifically call out things that will pay off in future episodes because they want me to reassure the reader.
This is something that you can give an actor and say You have changed your name. You have changed your family name because you want to not be associated with your mother.
That's really strong because it's it's backstory, but it's back storey through action and a main not.
Yes, but is not. I mean, it's no action that's being portrayed on camera.
It really is providing plot information in the big print.
Yes, I know, but it's more than pot information. It's relationship information, right?
So it comes to Julio's point about it being a resume, right?
Yeah.
And so if you really wanted to pay it off, you'd have to have something where they call him, like Mr Raffo and he's like Fleming, and that would be confusing.
And then we'll find out an answer to it later. It creates a question, so it probably the instinct to cut is understandable because you break the spell because it is confusing.
But there is a way that you can also speak directly to the readers and say, This is something that is going to pay off.
Yeah,
I agree. And so that's a choice that we could make.
And, as you say, it's It's definitely a form of cheating, but one that we've seen before.
And it's whether that kind of cheating was worth it for what? Maybe a minor scuffle later on, like that's what yet to be determined and hopefully will be determined in a in a writer's room. And in the end.
So the producers instincts, you know, and I've got somewhere I pushed back, and we'll get into those.
But he is very much about streamlining the storey and getting to the nuts and bolts off, trying to keep it as a cz dramatic as possible rather than leaning into the literary. And I can respect that.
Yeah, I would tend to be a little bit more on that side of things.
I mean, hopefully this is going to be a good contrast with your later work when we get to it, where you've gone, in your opinion, too far in that direction and want to bring it back.
So the next line happens during a scene where once again, Maggie is tryingto draw a a page of her book and the character of coming to life, and they're arguing with her.
And this was a line that I very much put in there for the reader because I wanted Toa Orient the reader and make them feel super clear on what was going on and why her own characters.
What is clearly her own imagination, why they're arguing with her.
And so she's got to drawn characters ones on Otta and one's a hippo and the line is.
Clearly, Little Otter is Margie's impostor syndrome, and Mama Hippo is her more disciplined creative side. Which leaves Margie is being, well, just Margie, I guess.
On DH, The producers note on that is I'll let you keep this, Chazz.
But really, maybe you should be an author rather than a screenwriter.
Exclamation mark Exclamation mark Question mark question Mark that said, I know you read heaps of scripts and you'll know a range of examples where screenwriters use thes.
Use these tricks. It's interesting. It's very important, used these tricks. He sees it is a trick, but they get in the way for me, and it is.
Yeah.
It's a trick. I actually fully agree with him. I actually think it should stay modified.
He let it stay as well, but he flagged it, and in the end, I've actually just so listeners know I've ended up removing it because I'm trusting Mohr that the actual characters will be sufficiently.
I can put it back in studio. All right.
I don't think you should. Well, you know, I haven't even read the whole script.
Must do your sugaring, I'll tell you.
OK, so this is my reaction I'm seeing in isolation, and we should talk about it at the end of this little chunk because you're like, mortified tto learn that and read the whole script.
I think the problem is clearly. If it's clear, then you don't need to indicate that it's clear you only need to indicate it's clear if you doubt that it's clear, right?
Like like that's the irony. It actually comes across as unconfident riding and what I would suggest, and this kind of leads us into.
If we want a Segway, I would suggest that you could do something like it place clearly with its as if Little Otter is Marge's impostor syndrome, A Mama hippo is Mohr discipline Crazy side.
I think it's really helpful to clarify the purpose here.
So the readers, including potential like directors.
Casting wardrobe actors, kind of just have that moment off understanding that punch line off clarification that we've talked about like Oh yes, and they either get that moment of, like,
dusting themselves off because that's what I thought all along.
So they actually feel that they're smart or if they feel lost, it catches them up.
I don't think there's a problem necessarily explaining something, and I use clearly for this reason.
But it actually to May in the context of a script says lacks confidence. And it's as if gives this invitation for people to imagine, but also doesn't say the audience has to get it.
It actually gives permission for the film a lover jh in of this to not be exactly that, while also steering people into exactly that.
Does that make sense like it's that's thiss balance between like, we know you can't really.
You never gonna explain this to the audience. But if we do our job properly, then it's going to be as if this thing.
Yes, No, that's a That's a really good note.
This is the version off the end of the flea bag script about the two women like exposing themselves, right?
Obviously, that's a punch line on the end off a whole 22 page script. Yours is like 12 pages in its the inciting incident.
But I definitely think you want to catch the readers up because you don't want any confusion on that point.
And it's someone who, for better or worse, has been put in positions where they've had to read scripts quickly for quote unquote professional reasons.
Sometimes you just like, Yeah, I'm reading this and it's 11 o'clock at night and I'm slightly confused with what's going on because I'm tired and it's like, Oh, cool. He just clarified that for me. Awesome. Thank you, right?
And that was my instinct. To put it in is just because, you know, someone might stop and ask.
Well, why, Ah, these fictitious, like these parts of herself, these parts of her psyche, Why are they taking opposing positions?
Yeah, I would say, whenever I use.
Obviously, it's kind of like a slightly sarcastic obviously, right?
Sometimes I think obvious and clearly have, like a level of irony to them, because it's like,
you want to say that this is actually something that subtle, you know, whenever I use obviously or clearly in like an email, it's passive aggressive, right? I have to be obvious.
So, I mean, the point you're making is good on DH, the one that when you first said the use of the word clearly, like if it was clear you wouldn't need the line, and if it was obvious again, you wouldn't need the line and it.
And it's coming across just by that opening word as being somewhat antagonistic, whereas your suggestion to keep it for the purpose of clarity.
But invite the reader to either catch up or give themselves a pat on the back for being so bright you know much in the way of in hereditary, where it's like hyper observant viewers may notice.
Yes, and I've sorry version of that. In another script that I read last night, which was a suit,
viewers will notice that, and I like that Astute is kind of like a less well, it's more of an Australian version of hyper intensive, I guess,
but it kind of Haider attentive Viewers will realise that, but I like the as if because it doesn't pass judgement,
in the context of hyper tentative works in hereditary, because it's not something that the reader should realise at that point. This is.
Well, I mean, it's on its own line, and it's in italics. So if the reader hasn't read that.
Yeah, of course. There has been no mention of it before. It just has hyper intensive viewers will see.
Yeah.
Instead of saying hyper attentive readers will have noticed, it's like, Well, obviously you're saying I'm not high printed. Clearly, clearly you're saying I'm not high for attentive, right?
But you could say Stoute viewers and that that also like astute viewers that the advantage of saying viewers is that means you definitely get the hyper attentive thing and then those people who are getting caught up it's going to be obvious for viewers.
I'm reading it, I'm okay, right, but I think that that's why I like a metaphor. It's as if you know, because or it's like you know you can soften it and make it.
And you posted in the slack threat before they earlier today, when we're discussing pre recording, you gave the example of Chazz yells at stew as if he's hated him his whole life.
And then you've got contrast ing with Chazz yells at stew because he's hated him his whole life, and both of them have a similar impact. But the 1st 1 doesn't feel like cheating.
Whereas the 2nd 1 If that was early on in a script without any kind of context, it would feel like cheating.
And it's just the change of one word into two words. Making it a metaphor instead of making it exposition.
And it's almost like if there's a takeaway for this is thie use of the metaphor, and it's whether, as if or it's like and there's probably some other structures that you can use that I can't think off.
It gives the appearance of making something Phil Mobile that's not. And then as if technique and I've ripped it off.
It's from Judith Westerns, book directing actors. They she talks about using as ifs in directing actors right physically in comedy you want to hide in.
One of the reaction is if they dropped 50 cents, you say you've dropped 50 cents, but I want you to play it as if you've dropped $1000 right or is if you dropped your child and that's it, and it heightens the performance.
That's a title thing that's completely an action line you could write in.
You know, little Otto drops 50 cents, but he chases after it as if he's dropped $1000 right, and it's something that's playable and clear and invites you to use your imagination.
So if you're in doubt about your unfilmables, I think shifting them into, as if for its like, get help, make it feel fallible and not feel wanke because there's an element off,
like slightly removed detachment to it, but also engages the reader's imagination.
It doesn't demonstrate your cleverness. And I think that is probably how do you know if you're unfilmables Winky? One test is Is this about showing the reader that I'm clever or isn't about making them feel clever? And there is a difference.
You want to make other people feel smart.
Agreed. And the final example that I want to use is actually one where I've stuck by my guns, every draft.
The producers asked me to delete this line, and I've kept it in every time because I actually think it's very film a ble and is in fact necessary.
And the context of the line is that Maggie is at a crowded event and her son has also just walked into the crowded event.
And neither of them knows that the other is there and the line reads.
Ah.
Near the whole entrance. Storm and Rico wonder in. They cannot see Margie through the crowd yet.
On DH. The producer has routinely asked me to remove the words. They cannot see Margie through the crowd.
Yet on DH, I've kept in every time, first of all, because it's suitable, right.
They walk in, you can shoot what they're seeing, where they're seeing you could have a big wide of the room showing where they are in relation to each other.
And the other really important thing to me is if they walked into that space and could see each other straight away, that would be super important.
If they walked past each other without noticing each other, that would be super important.
The audience, when they're watching this, and I presume, by extension, the reader, when they're reading this, would have questions about can these are these people aware of each other's presence in the space?
And so I have to say, First of all, no, they're not Andi yet.
I could arguably delete it, but I like to cheat with one word, just two.
Creates tension.
Yes, and I think that you can create that tension in the staging and in the shooting and in the editing of this scene. When these characters walk in.
This is halfway through the pilot. We've built the fact that these characters are estranged and don't talk to each other and don't want to talk to each other.
And they're in the same space. And so anyone would know they are going to interact, and this is and there is going to be conflict.
I agree with jazz, and I like the line. For that reason, my only suggestion, which is such a subtle suggestion, would be dot, dot, dot yet rather than the full stop.
Yet just because you were telling the crew is players with tension when you want them coming in, you don't want to be a reveal that they're both in the same space.
You want to open with a wide shot, or you want to find some cinematic way of showing that they're in the same spot and these two estrange people are going to collide.
That is what this scene is about, and you want to tell people that is what is going to happen without saying near the hall entrance.
Doorman Rico wondering Wide shot overhead. We can see Stone Rico in the corner on the other side. Margie like that doesn't actually tell us what the feeling should be like, whereas maybe there's a way that you could make it more stolen. Rico wondering they can't see Margie through the crowd.
She cannot see them, but it feels inevitable that they collide. You could actually write Maur the feeling in it to help clarify the purpose of that line.
But I'm not. I'm not sure it's necessary.
Teo, over clarifying.
Yeah, And this is one of those examples where I feel like it's more efficient to write the unfilmables than to write out exactly every shot that I imagined in my head, staging it to build that tension.
Like Salman Rico wonder in, they cannot see through the crowd.
Cut Teo Margie. She's blissfully unaware.
Cutback to Storm and Rico as they move slowly but inevitably through the crowd in Maggie's direction, whatever it just feels like this does the same thing while being an unfilmables.
Yes, if I wanted to satisfy the producer and change the line without arguing it, you could reframe. It is a question because it's going to be an audience questions. So why not put the audience question into the big print?
Yes.
You know Stone Rico wondering How long will it be before they see Margie?
Yes, I love putting audience questions in big print.
I know why. Right? And I think certain kinds of scenes and certain genres they're really useful.
And in that case you might get away with it because it should be what the audience is asking. If the producer puts back and goes, If we're not asking that question at that point of time, then we have failed in our drop dramatically like like Daddy's the purpose of the scene.
Okay, so my observation and the end is and this is me being a supporter of yours, but also me with my like development cap on, is that there's a reason that you was a writer of it in that stuff, in that there's an instinct,
that you have, so I'll be a good instinct.
But it's an instinct to put in something in there to clarify on indicate the relationship. So you kind of have to interrogate whether that instinct is necessary and sometimes the instinct when you interrogators know I need to take it out.
It is a Submersible unit to use a cubic craze or you can go. The instinct is correct with the execution is poor.
Yes.
I've taken up sword fighting this year, and I sparred with, like, one of the teachers, and he's like, You're making good decisions, but you just can't execute them right?
And he's. But he's saying that as praise, which is your decision making is correct.
It's just that you're too late or your ability to kind of pull off.
What the chain of decisions are making is poor, and I think sometimes in writing we have instincts that are correct instincts for something. But the words that we're putting on page aren't doing those instincts justice.
You can't argue with producers or any readers emotional response.
It's not incorrect. They felt the thing right, and I don't think you should, because as soon as you challenge someone's kind of emotional reaction of like well, I felt like it was unnecessary and then you like, Well, you're wrong.
What you're actually saying is what you're feeling is wrong, and instead it's like, Why are they feeling that?
And it could be that there is a way to make them satisfied bickering with someone you're collaborating with to make them feel like they're note is being listened to the note under the note but finding another way to steering it.
And I guess that's part of what we're talking about with, or this unfilmables stuff is there might be another way that you can rewrite your unfilmables or structural, which helps you solve that kind of instinct on a more technical level.
Um, I explaining myself correctly but using another technique to solve the problem.
Well, often by identifying the problem that he had with the line, I was like, Well, what was I trying to fix on DH by fixing what happened earlier? I could delete the line, and it wasn't necessary.
Okay, that is a ll the I mean, there were many, many more notes than those ones, but those were the ones that I thought most directly tied to what we'd learned in the previous two episodes.
Yeah, and this is a process thing, and we're about to do it with one of our projects.
I wonder if this is one of the advantages of using a scene breakdown in the way that I conceive of extended scene breakdown.
Right? And maybe if I'd done that for payload, I wouldn't have run into the problems that I'm now feeling.
And Matt might be like because, Well, I see a scene breakdown is kind of like a script without dialogue, and it should be more or less without unfilmables.
It is literally the action and the key beats in a scene. That's how I like writing scene breakdowns. They should be pretty lean that can't be detailed.
But I try to focus on, like, blocking and key action in imagery.
And it's about solving for me the dramatic problems. And then you can add in the other stuff because I think sometimes, as you say, maybe you're adding in unfilmables because, you know, on a subconscious level that something's missing, I don't know and that you're adding it in.
If you solve it on a dramatic level, then you no longer need it. I don't know.
Quite possibly. Okay, well, speaking of payload, should we Segway into payload?
Background Music
Okay.
So So payload is a science fiction thriller about an earth that is being evacuated because there's an oncoming catastrophe, which is actually a super volcanic eruption,
and lead character is a human trafficker who sells a child into freedom only to learn that it wasn't actually freedom.
And they kind of have to fight their way into, have to fight their way into a hostile space elevator to rescue this child and kind of hopefully seek redemption for their past actions.
Which makes it sound like a kind of taken. And in a way, it is.
It's kind of hopefully more of critique of those kinds of films, but it could potentially be a bit dad core now thinking about. In hindsight, I'm only interesting the first couple of scenes, right, and we'll put them available.
And the reason is that I'm like these scenes should be super dramatic and kind of get you in because people in now with the draft that we're at, we originally had, like, a limit of opening voiceover.
And then we went to like an opening title card and then we actually took it out because you're like, this is a storey that feels cooler, the more it's like I'm just getting into the world and the world teaches me about itself.
That's what we decided to come to right.
And the opening is more or less kind of a convoy driving into towards Thie compound the settlement where the space elevator is all right.
And then there is essentially a bunch of camped out refugees that as the convoy approaches kind of riot and try to go on to the convoy because the complex got to get through these very high security gates.
It's like a prison where the people inside the prisoner safe and the people outside means classic kind of dystopian science fiction stuff, right?
And there was something for May that all the time we've been working about it when I revisited on like this just doesn't grab me by the jugular as much as I wished it would be. Now.
Well, can I Can I make a broad observation? So I obviously read a number of different versions of this script in development many years ago, and I came into this read you just asked us to read the 1st 4 pages.
I came into this reed looking to confirm your opinion that it needed to have a bit more fat in it, that it was too sparse, that it needed mohr unfilmables or more flavour to it.
But just and this is obviously one person subjective opinion, I've got maybe three or four points where I think a bit more fat would do you a service.
But I don't think I think overall, the sparse writing style does re create the tension that you were trying to achieve.
No, that's good, dear Look, I think it's because my directors had.
I tried to pull a lot of that stuff out and focus on kind of what we can see.
And we hear not the extreme of Mount but in like spots. And that will also suited the film. The film should feel Lena mean, You know, it's not particularly extravagant in having those cinematic moments. It doesn't.
I don't think I have a moment off or in that kind of way of the other scripts that we've looked at.
So did you want to speak? I know you've highlighted some sections on. Did you kind of want? This's weird. It's like me, you.
You've got some lines That what? I presume you've got some moments that you want to call out, and I've got some as well. Do you want me, Tio? Start? I've only got four.
Yet you start.
Okay. So as you said, you've got the convoy rolling towards the base camp of the space elevator, as it were, and it has Teo cross through the dangerous refugee camp to get there.
Interior truck. Late afternoon rosary beads dangle from the rear view mirror, a dirt encrusted windscreen kicking up dust. In front is a black Humvee.
A black uniformed CT Aagaard man's a gun turret.
The truck driver forties puts on his seatbelt and shoots a concerned look at his assistant twenties. Who does the same?
There is whimpering from somewhere behind tthe um, the assistant bangs on the rear wall of the cab interior exterior wasteland. Continuous.
Belting down an unsealed road is a convoy of four vehicles the black Humvee leads. Behind the truck is a semitrailer stacked with shipping containers, followed by a fuel tanker and another Humvee.
They're travelling towards the silhouette of a large structure, the convoy and is a refugee camp.
Family cars are parked on both sides of the road, strong between them, a tense and tops the 1000 old refugees air just men and boys.
My. The first line of highlighted is actually your description off the refugee camp and the refugees themselves, and it's halfway through the first page.
So I'm really happy with all your description. Up until that point on the line is the convoy nears a refugee camp.
Family cars are parked on both sides of the road strung between them, a tense and tops.
The 1000 odd refugees are just men and boys, and I just needed Mohr.
I needed essentially for your description, and it doesn't have to be more words, but I needed the description to create in me the feeling that I would feel when I was actually seeing these people on screen.
Would I feel devastated for them? What? I feel sorry for them. What? I feel scared off them. So that's what I was missing there.
Um, my overall mode, for this is a needs emotional context. And I mean, it's a double edged sword. What an emotional context. It's emotional context of the characters.
How are they feeling? And then also, what is the audience meant to feel?
That description is pure visual, but with no tone.
It's actually kind of tone lis, And look, this is meant to be a matter of fact. There's a very kind ofthe matter of fact attitude to violence in a broad sense in this world.
But I think we've gone too far, and I might only be I don't know how I would rewrite it.
But you want to feel that desperation, that kind of desperation and despair and that these people have being abandoned, you know? And it could just be a simple is just writing that 1000 refugees, just men and boys.
They reek off desperation and despair, you know, and it might just be enough.
And it really is just something like that.
Strong between them are decrepit tents and tarps. You know, decrepit works because of the teeth, the Connexion into into crap intensity. I mean, that's why you were going for that kind of mirror.
But that might be enough I think part of it was that I had the wake that produces no early on that one of life, this entire sequence to be like two pages.
It was just like constantly pulling it all down. And it's not. It's one of those things to pages that aren't as engaging as three pages off. The same thing that are engaging will feel longer. Does that make sense?
Yeah, absolutely. And that's why they're red.
You could make something feel longer when it's short off.
You know, I still go back to one of our least listen two episodes where we analyse Carol and Carol.
The script for it read like a dense novel, but it was eminently suitable, and it was gripping white space.
And tightness isn't always more compelling.
So the next line is on page to the guards brutally repel the crowd from the semi trailer.
The convoy stops refugee swarm towards the trucks.
Guards dismount from the rear Humvee, but they will soon be overrun by the refugees.
Some refugees head to the tanker. The rear humvee rotates. His gun fires, but it's a water cannon. The refugees retreat.
The guards brutally repelled the crowd from the semi trailer.
Some refugees reach the truck and climb into the sides. Others try the freight door. More whimpering from inside, The father lives up his son, who grabs onto the truck's roof. A guide pulls the father away. Another wrenches his son down to the road.
The guards kicked the boy again and again, horrified. The father attempts to stop them, but the guards turn on him, thrashing him bloody. His son, sprawled on the ground, helplessly, watches.
You've got the word brutally, which is good, but I think I just wanted Mohr.
What am I feeling like? How brutal is it?
How my feeling sorry for the crowd and even just a couple of,
maybe descriptions of instances or something more poetic, like teeth fly, blood spurts, limbs cracked like something.
I mean, I don't want to get specific because it's like everyone's got their own writing. Selling. That's very subjective.
I just I wanted to feel the brutality Mohr than that line conveyed to me.
And it could just be that impression, adding a little bit moments of that oppression is stick running guards Britain to repel the crowd from the semi trailer, kicks, punches, whatever, like that kind of stuff.
And you do have the next beat is a father and a son, and it goes into the guards, like kicking the boy and then kicking the father.
So that is kind of what I'm thinking. But in a weird kind of way, the guards brutally repelled the crowd from the semi trailer. If you'd actually told me Maur what I'm actually seeing.
Been a bit Mohr, either Maur specific and more detailed or mohr universally specific, like more poetic.
Either one of those would have probably made me feel mohr what I would be feeling when watching it rather than what you're doing on the page here.
Something like gods Bri repel the crowd from the semi trailer. You know, it's chaotic, intimate violence or something like that, you know, bloodied.
Yeah. I mean, I know what we're looking for, but there's not enough description of what's going on because it's been to be that wide shot. Think narrowing in on the personal storey, which is the father and the son.
The only other line I've got is actually when we see the space elevator cable for the first time, which is near the top of page three.
The boom gates open. The truck lurches forward as the truck moves through the checkpoint, the assistant watchers on in or and the driver in bitterness.
On both sides of the checkpoint is a large fence bristling with concertina wire, past the fence, castle like walls of a settlement tower above.
Beyond those walls there can be seen part of a skyscraper like structure from the structure runs a cable upwards, extending as far as the eye can see.
And that there's two lines, but I guess my main issues. The second line is beyond those walls that can be seen part of a skyscraper like structure.
Full stop from the structure runs a cable upwards, extending as far as the eye can see on DH.
That feels very throwaway, where, as the camera is moving upwards, extending as far as the eye can see, I feel that would be quite an or inspiring shot.
And again that might be one of those ones like you suggested with my script, where you just ask the question that the audience might be asking like, How can a world so run down have achieved something so remarkable or something like that?
The question. The question is, where does it go from? Destruction runs cable upwards, extending as far as the eye can see. Where does it end?
Where does this amazing thing in? And part of it is that the it's kind of like an often on page two is the line as the truck moves through the checkpoint,
thie assistant watchers on in or and the driver in bitterness full colon and then the description of what is the base of the space elevator?
And actually, maybe it needs to be something like, As the truck moves through the checkpoint, the driver watches in bitterness and the assistant in all corn just to tell us that this is something that should be or inspiring.
Well, then I thought that I honestly felt that Colin was a typo because then the next thing you talk about is offence and not the structure.
Ah, well.
Because he's looking at or at offence.
That's true. We've actually gone too specific about, like the prison like nature of this thing.
Interesting. Yeah, I mean, that's on both sides of the checkpoint is a large chance person with concertina boy, large fences, a description. But it should be like the largest fan ever, right? Like it's got like a moat and fierce animals.
It's like the fence between Mexico and America.
Yes, or you described the fence as they're driving through it.
You know, you swap those two paragraphs around, so you go.
You go through the checkpoint through the fence, described that on DH.
Then as the truck moves through the checkpoint, the assistant watches on in order and you're looking at the structure and hopefully, you know, we're getting really specific with both of our examples here.
But to me, what's been fascinating so far is a minor tweaks. Replacing of one word two words moving a paragraph around it can have such a immediate and large impact.
It's called raining Hand. This comes to my most people who know how to write a scene thing, and that's a problem.
But it's also like you want to be on the right lines.
You don't want to be in a right action lines. A lot of people think focus on their structure, but often if they're riding on the basic level isn't good. It doesn't matter what their structure is.
I mean, to use a filmmaking example like editing. If you can't edit a couple of shots together in a way that makes them good, who gives a fuck? If you've got, like, eight sequence structure or whatever, your moment by moment is shit, and that just pulls people out.
It's just like being off key as a singer doesn't or a musician. It doesn't matter if you're following a song structure if you're off key.
If you can't play in time. If you're not harmonising properly, it doesn't actually matter, right, and sometimes we focus on the big picture because it's easier than the nuances of writing on the page,
right, And for this is the reason I came back to these 1st 2 pages is these first couple of pages should really pull people into the storey, right?
That's the whole point of it were falling. We follow this kind of military kind of convoy.
Okay, this is refugee camp, but this is kids. They can't riot. There's like shooting.
It's like, Holy shit, this just this, like, chaotic violence and they managed to get through.
And then as we come, kind of threw the camera just kind of, like, tilts up and reveals this fucking cable that runs to the heavens, right?
You know, And it's like, What the fuck is this?
Well, the way that you've just said that is much more gripping and or inspiring, then the words that you've written on the page.
Because we've ridden it. Kind of like a reported your descriptive style.
And in some ways it works because there is a storey border, this sequence and we've actually automatic for half of it, like an inch and a medic with music and all that stuff, and it translates to the screen pretty easily.
But that's because I was running and like a director like this's almost storyboards, right?
Like shot, shot, shot, shot, shot. And there is obviously an advantage to that because, you know, it works on a dramatic level, but it doesn't necessarily communicate the feeling, you know, But from the structure runs the cable upwards, extending far as the eye can see.
Doctor to the heavens. Question mark somewhere. But, like you can addle that tonal stuff.
I mean, even if you wanted to be bleak about it, where does it lead? Clearly somewhere better than here.
Clearly. There you go.
Well, in the context of this scene that would actually work because you've just had all these refugees risking life and limb to get onto a truck just to get into the base camp off this thing.
And what's interesting is, I think, is we got into this script.
We started being a little bit more poetic, Um,
little bit, little bit as far as my dry writing style goes, There's a location called Adams Rock, the scavengers livin thrown together hovels, canvas tarps and corrugated iron, rusted caravans, trucks and sheds.
Yet there are signs of hope.
Federal patches and animal pens, rainwater tanks is solar panels not saying,
that's the best description ever, and I'd probably rewrite it with hindsight.
But yet there are signs of hope is emotional context provided by visuals.
Yeah, absolutely.
It's interesting you focused on those moments because I would say the thing that I'm interested now as a writer is a lining.
Audiences emotionally where appropriate with the experience of characters and their because we're meant to be within the point of view of these guys thes truck drivers that, as it turns out, a smuggling people as part of this convoy into the compound.
There, the point of view characters in the scene and sort of this father in the sun, and early on we just cut between the point of views, but not put the reader in the emotional experience of those characters in the way that hopefully they are on screen.
If you watch the Ana Matic, you should be seeing that on ly shit. We're inside a truck cabin and there's a whole bunch of fucking refugees trying it on to my fucking truck.
And they're like pelting is like That should be terrifying.
And I think on screen it would read as terrifying. But we don't get that emotional reaction from those characters that we haven't actually ridden in. They're fucking terrified.
Yes. I mean, even, you know, writing Mohr of description of what the refugees look like. You know, just moments before they were desperate and despairing. Now they're desperate and marauding, you know, like.
One wash away from having clean here. But yeah, like just a few of those moments where, I think, help put the audience inside the emotional experience, the reader inside of the emotional experience of the characters,
right and indicate what the emotional experience should be with inside the point of view off the characters.
But that's something that I've kind of been thinking a lot about in terms of my writing, because men and I then,
this is just going to shameless plug restoration, which is we I mentioned very early on in draft zero, which you can now finally watching YouTube.
Thanks to dust, the script for that was reading a lot more in this payload style, right?
It's very This is just what you see right as very sparse, and we shot it and it holds dramatically because it was mainly about action, and that's always my concern.
But I think there is something to be said about on the Reid doing that kind of stuff to help make it easier for the reader to understand what they meant to feel to guide them a little bit more.
It's certainly music and wardrobe like describing that they looked, run down and dishevelled, and all that stuff is its water, even make up and set dressing.
Decrepit tents and tarps is set dressing. It's like other.
It's no unfilmables.
There's a difference between family cars, new family cars and rusted family cars. How long have they be mayor? They dirty, you know, dirty family cars, you know, between decrepit tents and tarps that tells you that they're being there for a while.
You know, they're just unkept men and boys like these guys are obviously like it's basically a campsite.
Background Music
You know that those few lines would give us a little bit more access to their desperation, and you can clean clarify those visuals by giving the emotional context, you know?
And early on, when we with the truck driver, the assistant they put on their seat belt and then shoot a concerned look to each other, I think you just have to emphasise it.
They're fucking nervous, you know, like you Khun really set that tension because that says the music should be that kind of really agitated.
Something bad is gonna happen.
Yeah, and it's kind of like when we were looking at Spartan.
It's not that you need necessarily unfilmables to make this work.
It's that you've stripped it back so far to just drama that I think you are missing out on the opportunity to make the reader feel what the viewer will feel.
Those were my moments from payload. Anything you want else do you want to talk about other than the guards being nervous?
I would say the guards and getting inside the refugees and, yeah, that blue utterly repelling the crowd.
I would also agree with that because there's a way that I could describe what that is, because the kind of violence is meant to be really intimate.
They're not shooting these people. They're like heating them with pistols and all that stuff.
There's probably some kind of imagery you could steal from,
recent protests against armed police and rebels,
in a dystopian destruction in a in a certain in states that you could probably find some description to put in there because it is meant to be chaotic and it's just everywhere, and it's just like it's like 1,000,000 combat.
But it's more than that. There is a difference between shooting someone and like him in the face with a fucking stick.
Absolutely.
That said, you've also used a very sparse style in your or nominated Ah, short screenplay dust bunny and both I and our intern and editor Chris Walker.
I actually don't think it needs any more fat than what is there, but I've got my Russian Alfa this, but do you want to tell us what dust bunny is about?
Okay, So dust bunny is a very short script about Samuel,
a boy of six and his relationship with his younger sister, Ruby, who's four and develops kind of like paediatric cancer that we never know what cancer that she has.
And the parents kind of put their emotional energy into taking care of Ruby and Samuels kind of slightly neglected.
And this means that his room as we will see, he gets very dusty, and he kind of creates an imaginary friend in his room that is a dust bunny, you know, as in a body that was made from dust.
And then he kind of befriends it and then takes it in to see Ruby before she passes.
Andi, I'm not going to spoil the ending because what we're actually going to do.
So like this script as Chris is going to read the whole thing and we're gonna put it in back manner so you can listen to the whole thing rather than just excerpts, mostly because it's a good excuse for me to get a recording of it, because it's dialogue bliss.
There is zero dialoguing this script, and what interested me when I talked about it was the kind of comparisons between the first draught and the fourth draft because, as I previously mentioned in the previous episode, previously previously,
was that one of my friends went in early draft and was like, I mean, you're describing what these people are doing, but I don't understand what any of it means or what they're feeling.
And that is fair.
But it was kind of like I still think you're useful, probably running exercise in hindsight that I did that because a lot of the scenes actions between the first draught of the fourth draft are similar, it's us. How they're explained to the reader is different.
There's one particular scene that I want to call out that's going to be like the main sinks. It's the closest one unfilmables that this script has, but otherwise it's, as you say, pretty sparse.
Except I guess the key thing that I added between the first draught in the fourth draft was that kind of emotional context.
I think you should elaborate a bit on that because the main thing that I've reread in this is the latest draft.
And when you're writing it, I read a number of different draughts once again and you are a bastard because you made me cry almost every time I read it.
And this time I read it.
My Children have reached. The age is off the two,
Children in this script and they behave exactly the way my two Children would behave on DH made me cry once again on DH. You're busted on DH.
I'm interested in hearing what you changed because reading it right now I don't think you need It is still quite reporter requite sparse.
And there was not a single moment where I would have unlike with payload, where I felt like I needed to be feeling mohr from the page than what I would imagine I'd be feeling as a viewer.
And I think the main reason for that even though the style is quite sparse, is that it is from the point of view off a young boy.
And things happening to Children make you feel for those Children in a different way.
I don't know why they're in a way that when I was reading the payload four pages I wasn't feeling for the truck drivers or the refugees, you'd have to do more work to make me feel for them.
Then being a child, going through this situation and being so powerless and so not understanding that I think the matter of fact style actually creates Mohr emotion,
then you trying to make the words do that lifting.
I guess the things that struck me reading this with hindsight between the two drives and this obviously, is not just hindsight being 2020 years, it's easy for me to kind of assumed that I had more conscious intent that I did.
I think the two things that I pushed was MME. Or use of imagery and injury connected toe action. It's not just they walk over there, but there's things that they do, their images that carry that emotion.
With dust bunny there's like this. What was the original opening scene? Was Sam Miller in a room waiting impatiently while his mum goes through.
Basically, he's room looking for every choice you confined and throwing it into a box.
Interior Samuels bedroom day.
A boy of four ish sits on a small bed who's donor, is blue and covered in cars. He swings his legs impatiently.
This is Samuel, tight against his thigh. Samuel grasps a shaggy, well loved pink toy rabbit.
In front of him is his mother early thirties, who is on all fours crawling around his room.
She's throwing every toy she confined in tow, a big cardboard box, cars, trucks and thie, occasional doll.
Secretly. Samuel shelves the toy rabbit under his T shirt.
Holds this It sze like very pictorial but very steel. Right? Where is the final draft?
Samuels finger runs across the top of a bedside table. He draws a simple face in the dust.
He sits on Ruby's bed, neatly made. The debate is pink. A few cuddly toys rest against the pillow.
Samuel swings his legs with boredom.
Sitting on the floor is his mother, Chloe. Spread around her are woven baskets full of toys.
She carefully picks through them, finding a suitable toy. She dusts it off and carefully places it in a bag. Among other toys.
That is in comparison to front of his his mother, early thirties on or falls frying every toy she confined into big cardboard box.
They're still action and still reportage, but they're sly shifts.
Yeah, but they're feels more tonal like that just feels like you've directed her differently Rather than being frantic. She's sad. It's like you've been away between the draft, have highlighted the powerlessness.
Yes,
yes.
Yes. And, you know, in the 1st 1 he's holding a pink toy rabbit,
and men while she's frantically thing, he shoves it underneath it, you know, whereas the action has been changed to he looks over the cuddly toys and his bad.
He places a few in the bag. He reaches the last toy, a purple toy rabbit, which is now in an opening scene.
Then I added, and then he glances at his preoccupied mother and quickly slides and under it there's just more kind of emotional clarification for the action, which I think is the difference.
But I think the scene that I kind of is only it's only at Scene three in the fourth draft and seem to in the first draught, which is.
A spacious family mover, rides high off the road on the back seat in a child. Restraint, said Samuel. He clutches the pink toy rabbit and contemplates it intently.
Besides him is another child restraint, but it is empty.
That is very It's like he's the picture, but it doesn't create.
It doesn't put the characters in relationship to the imagery, right?
I think it's part of being a note from Curry chain, so thank you curry.
It's just like the camera, revealing. That's how that would play. It's just like a wide shot, whereas Thie fourth draft is.
With a click, Chloe harnesses Samuel into his child restraint. She goes to slide the van door shut, but she stops. She is staring at the empty child restraint next to Samuel.
The moment passes, and she slides the door of the family car shut. Orange kissed trees are reflected in the window. A single leaf falls. As Samuel watches. It takes on the grace and movement of a dancer.
It is creating a relationship between character and what we're seeing. So it's putting us inside their experience. The moment passes and she slides the door of the family card shut Orange history's a reflected in the window.
That's a moment imagery, but that then links us to a single leaf falls a sum. Your watches. It takes on the grace and movement of a dancer, and it is a metaphor, for.
Is it a metaphor? I thought it's going to be like a visual effect where it actually, you know, almost does a little dance. Like it's like a seeding of magic realism.
They're a little bit of magic realism. Yes, he's meant to be the seating of magic realism, and that was certainly curry suggestion. You could say Estonia watches it. It becomes a dancer.
You know you could do that, which is film a ble, but the it takes on the grace it is another, as if as if it's a dancer.
Yeah.
Yeah, but the big difference is in this latest version Ruby has we've seen her bleeding and everyone be worried.
And then we've cut to the scene that you've described with the mother sorting through the toys and now the car.
What you've done is actually just restructured it without changing.
Obviously, you've written the words well, but in terms of unfilmables, I don't think you've added or subtracted unfilmables.
You've just restructured it so that when people are seeing this scene, they are bringing, as you say, a very different emotional context to it and feeling the sadness of it.
Whereas the other way around there would actually be asking themselves questions they wouldn't be feeling they would be going.
Where is that child?
Who's that restraint for what's going on? It would be an intellectual exercise rather than an emotional one.
You're right like it's not actually adding that Muchmore emotional context than I thought it was in terms of the actual words on the page, it says thie action is clarified that the ideas of being dramatised, that's actually what it is.
I think you're putting that opening scene upfront does mean you sacrifice somewhat on reveal later on.
And this is something that we talked about in a think you may have been in one of the unfilmables episodes aside, Tangent, we went on.
But the difference between, you know, do you want a surprise, your reader slash audience, or do you want them in the moment?
And with this particular script, all the changes you made between draft has been to do less and less,
reveals on Mohr and Mohr just having the audience in the moment, feeling both what the characters are feeling but also feeling for the characters by taking away all the plot questions.
Yeah, you just sitting inside the experience of, ah, six year old trying to understand what is happening to his four year old sister.
And I guess in this version you lose the reveal that he's got a sister and she's sick, which in the very first draft you don't even know she has. It's a sister, but when she kind of that scene that effectively the coal opening on the inciting incident is nose bleeding.
With a smile, Ruby watches Samuel put lollies into her bucket. Inside the bucket sits a well loved purple toy rabbit.
Then a big red drop falls into the bucket and onto the rabbit and another blood ruby whimpers.
Samuel looks up at her. Her nose is bleeding. She starts to cry. Fear crosses Samuel's face, and he shuts, his eyes cut to black.
And we cut to them packing stuff up. We don't know what's happened to her. She could be dead. She could have had a bloody nose. So but we know something has happened to her.
And that it's bad, Yeah.
The question is, what is it?
And to kind of start wrapping this up. There's one more example I want to give, because there's a very clear difference between the first draft and the fourth draft tonnes of how the action is written.
But the action itself remains the same, and that's what I think is interesting. So in the first draft.
Walking towards him are his parents. They are visibly distraught, eyes bloodshot. His mother leans on, her husband.
Whereas in the fourth draft.
Slouching towards him or his parents, visibly distraught, eyes red. They support each other's Wait, Samuel's face saddens.
There's kind of a subtle shift, there is obviously the use of the word. Slouching has more personality, right?
But there's also that kind of subtle.
They support each other's weight, has a metaphoric quality to it, as well as a visual description of what is going on.
Yeah, absolutely.
I think what is interesting about this, and based on Chris's notes as well, I expected you guys might be like, Oh, maybe there's an opportunity to use some more on unfilmables of that unfilmables was really helpful.
And the answer his No, it's actually kind of like an effective example off.
Sorry.
Dramatisation working.
Yeah, just kind of Rhea. What I would call a reportage style.
Sure. I'm sorry that this this particular example hasn't been as fun and brutally back and forth a cz We critique it of this work.
You know. So try Teo, get some key learnings out of this. Even though dust bunny doesn't really have many unfilmables thing, there's a couple of key things that we can kind of pull out at this point anyway.
One, which is how you can control that. There are ways to control tone on the page without using unfilmables.
That obviously very careful choice of the language can control tone, you know, And that relates specifically to kind of more precise descriptions ofthe physical action.
You know, that's kind of what, in hindsight, is interesting that I was more precise.
You know, I think of that walking down the hallway vis is slouching down the hallway example, right?
That's really strong, because kind of a bit of a clear, clearer idea of emotion.
I mean, this is writing one on one stuff, but it matters, you know, sometimes maybe the reason that your unfilmables Phil's wanke is because you haven't actually being economical in your word choice earlier that you kind of end up having to use some kind of flowery.
Description around it.
And I think for me, lastly, the thing that kind made me originally think this was using unfilmables. But it's not, is what I've been calling emotional context, which is, I think, sometimes saying what the emotions of people are like.
They are visibly destroyed. I mean, clearly, in that case, you should be needing to say that is visibly destroyed because on screen they're destroying us, should be visible.
Otherwise, we weren't they there destroyed, but way need to point out that it's going to be visible so it doesn't feel like a cheat.
But I think that kind of emotional context describing how people feel is something that is worth doing on the page, even if a kind of fall somewhere between in showing and telling.
That's kind of what I guess, maybe really think they're unfilmables. But I think they're really important because otherwise we don't have music.
We don't have performance. We've only got physical action, and sometimes that can be open interpretation. But it can also be read, a CZ lacking a bit of lacking some personality.
So, you know, I think emotional context carries a lot, you know?
So I guess we should transition into talking to carissa lee about her feelings about the unfilmables in the scripts that she read.
So in There's segment of our episode on unfilmables Part three episode. We're actually joined by Caruso, who's been reading some of the examples but now is joining us as a guest.
Welcome to draft zero Carisa.
Hello.
Good. So we were interested in bringing you in to discuss thie unfilmables because you've had the distinct pleasure of reading all the scripts and often sections of the strips that didn't make the final edit.
And we want to draw on your experiences.
I mean, you're an actor, writer and a critic and an academic, which is interesting intersection, but particularly your experience as a actor.
Do prefer actor actress just before I continue.
Um, actors find I think actor seems to be the universal thing that people prefer because it's not so gendered. Yeah.
I think that's where it's heading. So, you know, obviously you'll be drawing your experience, of course, those four areas.
But I think we're interested in drawing on your experience is an actor because as we talked about one of the key audiences or one of the audiences for unfilmables is actors that maybe potentially performing or script.
So I guess we kind of wanted to talk to you about the unfilmables that you liked in the scripts that you read.
The weather is just a turn of phrase and any that kind of bumped you.
And then we can kind of interrogate why that is, and see if there's any kind of being useful that we both Chaz and I and the wider draft zero community can kind of learn from your experience of having riddle these kind of contrast ING scripts.
Yeah, Okay, sure. Well, but it's really hard to look at a script and not have, like the actor slash writer on a bit, because I'm sort of like, Oh, that that kind of jokes in a writer's sort of away.
But then it also works or doesn't work in an act of sort of way. It's sort of weird. I always end up looking at things with both lenses, anyway.
Yeah, yeah, well.
That. I mean, do you find those things that bump? You? Isn't a rider that don't bump you as an actor or things that you like as an actor that you was the writer? Kind of like, Oh, because they're any kind intentional. Do they kind of sea with both eyes?
I feel like as a writer, I appreciate a bit more in the script, like with Moonlight, the sort of setting the scene there and talking about what it all looks like, and it's really beautiful and,
and it's kind of probably a bit more than what you'd normally find in a script.
But I love that. I think it's really nice, I think, just from a reading point of view. It's like reading a really beautiful book.
But yeah, I think as an actor, you kind of just want room to move and less is good.
But at the same time, from a writer point of view, when they do kind of wax lyrical, I'm like, Oh, that's gorgeous.
The yeah, I find that it's kind of interesting finding a balance.
When you're when you're reading plays. Generally there's very little action,
and it's nearly a ll about just dialogue and maybe a little bit of blocking in terms of what's written on the page.
So Su told me that you've got a theatrical performance background as well a screen. So is it Do you prefer the not to be directed from the page as an actor when reading script?
I mean, a little bit is good, but when I've got one example is Bernard Shaw.
I mean, lots of people love him. George Bernard Shaw. He did like Pygmalion and the ST Joan and that kind of stuff.
He is shocking for it. He even has let in some situations how he wants people to be directed like he's actually telling the director what he wants rather than trusting that they're going to do the job.
It feels like you're getting too old for saying that.
But yeah, it feels a little bit like if you don't trust the performer, it's sort of evident if there's just a bit too much in there, you know?
Trust is an interesting word, because one concept we've been kicking around with this idea of breaking the spell that a bad unfilmables breaks the spell.
And maybe the version of the kind of the translation of that for an actor is it breaks your trust, right?
Yeah.
Like, was there any scripts that you read that kind of, like broke your Connexion or their trust with the writer in terms of how they would write the performance?
Well, I think with regards to performance, Um, I think searching for Bobby Fischer was a bit like that.
I think that was a little bit sparing Feet e about the performance,
which I guess it kind of had to be a little bit specific because it had a lot of chess moves and things in there, and for people like me who don't know chess very well, it's kind of handy, but at the same time, it kind of talks about what the facial features are going tobe a and what,
I guess thie tone and stuff of their voice.
I think that I mean, you know, you want a bit of an idea where they want you to go with it.
But at the same time, you'd kind of like them to trust that you're going to get there on your own, you know, or the director is the one that's going to decide on the sort of all the day what, where it's going to go.
But I guess in some ways it depends on the script writer if they know exactly what kind of thing they're gonna have whereas moonlight.
Which is interesting because it was a writer director as well as Moonlight Sze. Yeah, but so was moonlight. Moonlight was bright director adapting it was actually a play.
Okay, interesting.
That's amazing because, um, it kind of shows, too, because they there's so much there that they're trying Teo invoke in the reader while they're doing.
And I think that that kind of care that you would take Teo invoked. That kind of feeling in a reader is so important because it makes people know exactly where they're going to go. Tone lies.
And so, using about tone in terms of performance Just Teo because you might be using a slightly different language as a performer than we are as writers. You're talking about the tone of the performance. Yeah, or the scene.
Yeah, well, I mean, it could be because, I mean, I'm assuming DPS read scripts to when they're looking at what shots are required Or do they get a 2nd 1?
I'm not sure, because I know that, yes, that,
it would be helpful if I were kind of shooting a thing to see what was kind of the emotion behind it, because, I mean, DPS is so amazing with how they are able to capture that, and I feel like that kind of insight would be beneficial to them, too.
Not that I could really speak for them, but, yeah, I feel like they're there.
Performance, I think, is really captured by how they write is as opposed to what they write it. Some, Yeah, I think that there is trust there, and they kind of plant those seeds of what you meant to feel in a scene that's really helpful.
So one of the things that we loved about Bobby Fischer was how, like near the ends of the scenes or big lines.
As a writer, he would explain to the act kind of exactly what the emotion of the moment was supposed to be on.
Was that the exact kind of thing that made you feel untrusted by the writer?
A little bit. I feel like it did feel a little bit like they were telling rather than showing all kind of coaxing it out because it was,
I guess, in a way, because it makes me feel like the writer or the director may go for a very particular look and, you know, have not really letting the actor kind of do it in their own way, if that makes sense,
to sort of, because, I mean, I like this idea of a collaborative thing where you get to sort of just let it go where it's going to go, and the performer could bring a whole of flavour to it.
Whereas I feel like there wasn't enough like much room for that in this script.
It was just very. Do this do it like this and this and this, and it has to look like this. It was almost like a manual, and it's and that's just my personal point of view to some.
Some actors would really love this, and, you know, I could if I came across a script like this, I could certainly work with it.
But yeah, it does feel a little bit like, Yeah, there was a certain thing in mind with thes, and there was a really moved room to move.
What strikes me is that I felt like moonlight.
He had a similar kind of level off for lack of a better word, creating emotional context as searching for Bobby Fischer.
But this has been a za rider on Is a reading on act. Is there anything about that you can think about in terms of the kind of the way they've used the language struck either structurally or the word choice that makes moonlight different, then searching for Bobby Fischer.
I think it's written more like a book like The way it's written.
It's kind of yeah e think evocative, definitely, Like it's got a more visceral kind of sensory feel to it, like, you know, all sound drowned out by the echoing ocean the night covering these two.
More evocative rather than specific?
As close as I've ever been in a kind of really brings you in, it makes you feel something like a like a really well written novel. Does some plays do it, too?
I think what it's doing, maybe is what we ended up talking about in the context.
It's evoking your imagination as an actor, right?
It's making you rather than telling you what howto act, it's kind of guiding you how to feel, and it's interesting. You use the word sensory.
It's engaging your senses, which is a way that if you which is, I don't want to tell you how to enact.
I'm kind of more communicating. It's the audiences to the audience that getting actors to engage their senses and to help them kind of drop into a senior is really important, right?
Like a director, it's like you can kind of use sensory memory when directing actors.
And maybe that's what Moonlight is doing in that way is it's kind of engaging you on an actor level by speaking to you as an actor.
Whereas Zaillian, in searching for Bobby Fischer, is coming from it from more like, Yeah, what?
What do we see and what do we How do we as in what do we see them look like they're feeling as opposed to how their senses air being engaged.
It's exactly what it is. I think they were looking at what it's going to look like.
And, you know, that might still, you know, they might direct them and let them their emotions sort of go wherever they need to go.
Or some actors don't necessarily work that emotionally, which is, you know, it's fine if it works for him and beer. Whereas I I think I respond better to scripts, that kind of yeah, invoke that will kind of get some kind of imagination.
Yeah, it's weird, but it's really, really cool. I found the same thing with, um you were never really here. That kind of invoked a similar thing.
They kind of did a bit of both. It kind of gave you a bit of a sense of what it was going to look like. But at the same time, what was going to be inside, like, what was going to be going on internally, you know?
That's really interesting because lead the chosen. I particularly loved the writing style of that script, and so when you before you came on, well, like my two favourites were kind of like moonlight and you were never really here and it was like, Really, that's interesting.
So it's kind of interesting that you've connected kind of the interiority of the writing off that were there any kind of.
Well, what did What did you guys not like about or not? Not not like, but what was what didn't work for you with the You never really hear.
Well, we were looking for something very specific with this thesis.
The film made me feel something when watching it, and we were going.
How do they recreate that on the page on? They didn't necessarily do it. But correct me if I'm wrong here. But listening to you one of the things that it's not just about focusing on the look or or how evocative it is.
One of the things that I heard when you were comparing Moonlight with Bobby but also with you were never really here, is it?
Gave it didn't limit your choices as an actor. Where's Alien was so precise, which is really good for us as readers and directors, because we want to know exactly what is going on.
But for an actor, is it fair to say that you felt constrained reading that, whereas in these other scripts, you felt kind of opened up in ability to play.
Yeah, there's more room to play with these others groups, I think, because we have Bobby Fischer.
I guess also, it's the pace and the nature of what kind of film it is.
They kind of need it to be kind of snappy. They needed to be, You know what? It is a very sort of polished film, but it did feel a little bit like, this is this And this is this and this is this and it's all very like Task based its ovary.
Yet it's about just getting it done. It felt like whereas this Yeah, these other scripts will like it's coming from a place of raw emotion.
It could also be a general thing to like I mean, they're very different types of films because moonlight and you're never here was just sort of yet they're very raw and very kind of visceral on DH emotional.
Whereas Bobby Fischer is kind of more of it feels like more of a drama kind of coming of age Storey.
Was there any kind off? Was there any Flynt's that particularly kind of resonated with you? Teo?
I'm just trying to think about basically surging for an example when you talked about Are you getting the visuals? But you're also getting the interior of the character like I wanted.
Oh yeah.
No, What you see is giving us access to the interior or you as an actor, the interior of the character. I'm curious.
Yeah, yeah, All right. The gunmen stares at him past him. Joe gently takes the gunman's hand that still clutches the blood soaked chances Tito to his stomach.
The fact that he gently takes it that says so much.
Yes, like in Bobby Fischer. If they put things down or they move some or whatever, they just move them. They just put them down unless it's got a point.
A cz two. Why, you know, you know, they just want a thing. Well, they're doing something really quickly because time.
But this and I just little things like that about how he grabs things and little things about, like the paper bag over his face at the start, talking about the droplets and how it's so Type two.
His face. You can already imagine what that would feel like, and that would be so freakin scary.
And, you know, it just feels like the little hints in the physicality that he's writing or she is very.
I didn't actually see the gender of the person, but it feels like the giving you clues in the physicality, and I think that's really quite clever. And it makes me I kind of have a bit of an insight as to what this kind of person is like.
It kind of. It's almost like a contrast to who they are what they're doing, You know what I mean?
If that makes sense, like they're doing something so awful, but at the same time, they're doing it gently or they're doing it while smoking while they're doing it. Just the thing. I think the juxtaposition of what they're doing and how they're doing it makes it so interesting in a kind of betrays who they are.
Yeah, it's actually really insightful, I guess. Maybe that's a better word.
Chazz Women talking about dust bunny that that lot later draft.
It's not that it dramatised it gave physicality to some of those emotions.
I'm just thinking in the hindsight now for ABS script that on my own there, talking about revisions, that that kind of physicality helps ground.
The character on DIT is action, but it xhm or than just they walk over there. It's looking for the kind of the nuances of the description that is playable.
Yes. Yeah, and I think it just a little, just little hints because, I mean, the script is predominantly, you know, it is action and tells you what this person sees, but just a little.
The little clues of who they are in that is just really, really nice. Whereas Moonlight, it just kind of tells you what they're feeling and talks about the physicality and more of a poetic sense, and it's really beautiful.
I saw a longer script. It's so gorgeous.
It is gorgeous.
No. Yeah, I just love it. And that film is just stunning.
I just love it that, I mean, what was the original name of it was the boys.
The skin is blue and I just or something like that. It makes reference to the fact that their skin looks blue. And I think that's so honoured throughout the whole film. And it's gorgeous. It's just it's beautiful.
In Moonlight Black Boys look blue.
Yeah, I love it because, you know, when I saw that when you go sent me the script, that was the original name of it was like, Oh, my God, that's amazing.
Is so good. Yeah.
Yeah, and they did absolutely. On our I know you weren't particularly a great fan of that lethal weapon description.
And I think the answer's kind of we like and some I don't know if it's worthwhile, because it's kind of obvious, which is It's like I don't like it. It's not for the actor.
Yeah, it feels like like a Yeah, definitely that one.
That's the short answer. You know, it's for the production designer.
But like like it was an inside joke or something that someone who they were writing with, But it felt like it was written by one of those stereotype Leela film dudes.
You know, they they're in their office and they've got, like, a whiskey decanter thing in the corner there. And they've got a really pretty blonde is their secretary on. They smoke cigars all the time.
I would say shame. Blackwood very, very happy to think of himself. Is that kind of Ella lost that right? A stereotype. That's all his kind of stuff.
But I think what is been with the lethal weapon lying, you know, the Italy that this is really great place to have sex.
Do you think that could be turned into like an attitude that could be playable if you like?
This is the next scene because you meet the guy or in the house.
You know? Do you think this idea that you could describe a location and saying, Oh, this is really great place to have sex would then help inform how you would approach the role as an actor like in terms of whether it's your wardrobe, you know how it would work.
And some actors, you know, a lot of actors do kind of talk backto, not talk back.
A lot of actors kind of do kind of have discussions with the wardrobe and makeup and stuff in terms of how they perceive a character. You don't think that will kind of create an image for you.
It might sort of give. It might give the actor a bit of swagger like they kind of go into the room and think, I have that in mind and that could be what sort of place it is if it's a kind of place, it looks, you know, it's the kind of place that would be great to have sex in.
Like maybe that's the kind of priority that that person has. Who has that that house, like he's like, Cool.
I could bring all the ladies or men or whoever here and this is kind of where I'm at and this is my nest of glorious both.
And this is kind of yes, that that kind of thing could inform a character. Definitely.
That would be really quite interesting to play. What if that was a ll The clue you had?
It would be quite a challenge, but you'd be like, Oh, I'm going to play this. This is where I live. So is a reflection of who I am is a character. So yeah, I think I think definitely character work. I'm not sure about water.
Maybe. I guess that yes, that I just had It has been so long since I've seen Lethal Weapon. I think I was like a kid when I left.
The scene plays very differently on screen. It's quite interesting that it sze they definitely translated it so you don't get you don't get it.
Yeah.
You don't know what you get like an aerial shot of where it is and the Beverly Hills.
But then it's kind of just with Riggs and Murtaugh, because I watch this afternoon this episode, and it's just them coming through the gates and you don't really get a good look at the house.
Oh, yes.
But what you do see is like three or four girls in like bikinis lying around,
and then you see you don't have much of an interaction with a guy looks a little bit sleazy, but it's Maur that they look around and say, Okay, there's a whole bunch of young women here and just one older dude, and that creates more of the sleazy.
Yeah.
Impression, I think, than the line.
This is really glace place tohave sex, whether Richard Donald oh, chain black.
Maybe Shane Black decided before hands after the script. But that was the how they decided to actually translate that idea to the screen.
And suddenly you've got for actresses in their bikinis around a Paul and you're like some older dude That probably will give you the swagger as it is in terms of informing how to play the character. Right?
Yes. Yeah, definitely.
So I guess what I've picked up from talking to you is this idea ofthe, like speaking to the sensory eri for actors like,
and that's something I just think I can think about and because my writing style is really kind of very dry and reportage.
But finding a way to kind of like speak to the kind of engaged the actors imagination, but on a sensory level could be valuable and thinking a lot about physicality and how that kind of connects to the imagery,
not just action, but going to the specifics of how they do the action.
Yeah. I mean, yeah, definitely. I think there's also value in having a like a script that doesn't necessarily have a ll that in it, because you're still trusting the actor to sort of get there and figure it out.
Whereas you had, like, the kind of with the Bobby Fischer think it kind of felt handholding like I was like, No, you're going to go here and you do this and like, Cool. That's going to come later with directions.
So get, don't maybe do that.
Now. We'll figure it out on the day or the director will do that on the day sort of thing. It just kind of feels a bit.
It kind of makes the script a bit more convoluted, I guess. Maybe a bit kind of clunky and just full of things it doesn't need to be full of.
That's just my opinion, because some actors might find that really helpful. But yes, I think there's still if you trust an actor and to say yet this happens. I do this. They move here.
They're still freedom for them to figure out how they do that. Why they do that.
You know what kind of motivation and stuff they get.
Then that's you know, that's kind of good as well, because they trust there. It kind of feels like you are trusting the actor to do their job.
So I think that's there's value in that as well as writing, really in a more evocative sort of way.
Yeah. I mean, my biggest takeaway from this is perhaps to apply the specifically universal not just a big print, but also the character motivations as well, like performance description.
Yeah, I mean, it's up, I guess, some. It's up to the writer, I guess because I'm not sure if,
because with writing if, unless the act like this, the writer is a performer or they kind of have that lens in mind, they may not necessarily want to have to trouble themselves with,
how the character's going to get there.
They just know that they do, and they have got a rough idea of why.
And it's kind of up to the acted and figure out the rest, which is it's fine. That's okay, but yeah, I don't know what to give him something.
This is idea we had of the universally specific or the specifically universal, which is creating something that feels like it's specific thie. Great example was that we got from the quiet place, which is like, It's the most horrifying sound you've ever heard.
Doesn't describe what the sound sounds like at all. It just tells you that it's the most horrifying.
It kind of evokes the feeling and maybe sort of riding in the specifics of the performance. I think like that.
That kind of engages the imagination of the actor while also hopefully communicating to the reader, which is what all the moonlight stuff does.
How that is meant to feel is kind of like a good kind of middle ground,
that gives you trust while also helping people navigate script, which without a lot of that stuff, can feel very difficult to emotionally pass.
Yeah. Yes.
You know, as like, unless you're an actor, you know, looking for all that stuff that's me. That's my.
They like. On the other end of the spectrum, though, there is such a thing is writing too much.
Which old maid? Terrence Malick Goodness may The tree of life.
It's beautiful, It's beautiful. I have no idea what the fuck it means, but it's beautiful.
It's like if I got a script and read all that, I would shit myself.
Honestly, I would just I would go What?
What is happening? And I would I think you need to have a relationship with the writer slash director in that respect to know what the fuck?
Because I'm just reading that it was just kind of like Why?
I mean, I understand the visuals and and you know what? You want to be in the shot and what you wanted to represent and everything. But at the same time, I feel like having a real conversation with Malik could be beneficial for this particular script.
Because yet damn hit's, it's tze beautiful.
But yeah, I just feel like they were so much here that without actually knowing where,
his head is that and what it all means to him, I thinkit's hard to understand what the hell, Because this description is just insane on I imagine the whole script is like that.
Yeah, Damn.
Yep, Yes, but you get it. That's I mean, I get it in the film. That's what's weird.
It's like the beginning of the conversation with thie actors is like, actually that document.
Yeah.
That's it. So we kind of wrap it up fair?
So we've got two questions in this Q and A section.
Yes.
The first question comes from Reddit, and I believe you remember the question better than I do. But it was more about putting like times and locations and being really precise in sluglines.
So the question comes from Peter. James is actually his Reddit and underscore Peter James.
Maybe it's on his real lame, but it's his Reddit name.
I was chatting with another reddit of the other day about the category of unfilmables that are 100% do not includes, like having 3:30 p.m. In a slug line.
And it's a Tuesday afternoon in the description that I have no bearing on the plot, all the scene, and are communicated visually and don't need to be.
His question is begging other questions in that he's assuming that the information has no bearing on the scene and therefore shouldn't be included because I still go back to that.
That scene in hereditary, where they're talking about how things are oriented to the North West and this dire AAMA on going into such lavish detail that even though the film is looking at it very slowly,
I didn't pick up all the detail that it's describing their and I certainly didn't have a compass orientation.
But the information did add on the reed to the experience of reading it, even if it's not capturing exactly what I was experiencing when watching it.
Because there is the feel of it is that it's organised. That's what, like the Northwest thing, is actually saying that this is kind of there's a deliberateness to the layout of this, these objects that make it feel a cultish, which is something that could have actually written in as well.
They could have written that it is the feeling the way this is laid out on whatever you know, the layout of the room is meticulously organised or something like that. But the Northwest thing in the context of the occult, it's not just saying it's deliberate.
It sze kind of heightening yet that's poorly expressed you, but I think you know what I mean.
Yeah.
Yeah, but essentially it goes back to if you do it right, you, Khun, get away with it and I'm getting away with it isn't the right word either.
You know, the writer there made choices on DH.
You didn't have to include all that detail in the script and chose to to give the reader may be, as you said, a feeling like of knowing all this's interesting.
Like the additions off the unfilmables added,
to the readers experience and may be compensated in ways that music or Maur art direction might do in the piece.
Yeah, And look, if you're doing if you're working, say, with David Fincher and a project on Like, say, Zodiac, where he was so absolutely obsessed with Authentic Leak recreating these crime scenes,
that I could imagine some of that stuff might have been reaching into the script because we want a script to have a feel off accuracy because the film should feel accurate, not haphazard, with how it treats these kinds of things.
Right, but more generally, the 3:30 p.m. In the slug line, and I use this example, but I'm going to reiterate it because it's worth it.
Which is Tue May. The only reason that we have seen headings in a script is for technical reasons.
They're not there to make the script easier to read their there so you can break it down and work out how to shoot it.
And as Julio said, his follow up to our previous episodes, sometimes too many seen headings breaking up something that is quite heavily into cut actually breaks the spell that reminds you that you are reading a script riling her storey.
Yeah, on that's when I think in in a really well timed sort of montage or action sequence when they're moving from location to location.
Ah, lot of writers just don't have sluglines anymore because they want it to flow. They'll find a different formatting way to not break the spell.
Yes.
Yes, the many, many slugs or whatever you want to call them, which is what the Coen brothers do.
You know it is to indicate the changes of location, but my point is putting technical information that is about the technicality of shooting such as afternoon.
Knowing that it's afternoon or early evening possibly has no bearing on your scene or the plot other than tracking the passage of time. But it's important in terms of the shooting.
If it has an emotional context, then you might see more than afternoon. You know, the low the low afternoon sun casts long shadows and whatever can have an emotional bearing.
But if all your writing is afternoon and not referencing it, it is just to me as irrelevant as 3:30 p.m.
But not because I think passage of time is really important.
So again, plugging restoration if you anyone watches it and you guys all should, it's free because it jumps time back and forth.
To help track chronology, we specifically wrote Day one day, two day, three day four day five in the scene headings to make it easier for everyone, including the readers.
The thinking being it is going to be easier to follow on screen when you got the cumulative effect ofthe makeup and wardrobe and all those things to find the kind of passage of time. Then it would be on the page.
So we made sure to do that. And there's another project that I'm working on at the moment with Matt that takes over a period of nine months, and it's kind of interweaving storylines.
And we're going to, at least for our draft, and I see no reason to take him out, actually, track time of not just probably not time of day, but certainly day and time of year, you know, probably dates.
And we made You will take it out when it goes out to readers.
But his writers, we sure as shit need to know this happens on the 23rd of Maine, and this happens like a month later.
All that stuff because it's kind of like into evening true crime stuff.
So the timeline, quite literally the timeline is really important for that Storey.
Even if the audience is not going to get a date in the corner. Us. Understanding it as writers is really important.
Well, even the in once upon a time in Hollywood. The duration of the dates like I didn't know the precise dates in relation to the Manson murders.
But just the reading out of the dates made it feel in some way important and vital and foreboding, even if I didn't know this is the day.
Get point is technical information than is generally technical.
That would fall under the umbrella or the egas off an instructional and makes sense to put in a scene heading,
putting the scene ending That's what interior exterior and I know a lot of people get hard and formatting, but I think it's fine, you know, generally speaking, I mean, I'm not going to sit there and go.
It's 9 15 fucking AM and then slugline for 9 16 AM But sometimes their stuff can be useful for a technical purpose.
Fine, but I think we've got one man.
Speaking of Matt, Matt's question is, what is the relationship between unfilmables ity and adaptation terms of how you take the unfilmables City off?
Most novels there were a lot now have been so influenced by cinema that they read almost, has detailed treatments and shoehorn them sometimes delicately said, I was not into the other form.
The recent adaptations of Taught Soy or Gatsby or Catch 22 10 2 usually be noble failures.
I realise this isn't what you mean by unfilmables necessarily. There was something about the relationship between prose fiction, screenwriting.
What he's actually saying is even though we think about storeys being unfilmables, you can't adapt that.
Is there some way in terms of the way that novels express themselves? That is different to screenwriting?
That is a challenge in Adaptation. What say you chose? You read more nobles in May?
Well, I think he's right in that. There are a lot of novels that are written in a way that is easily adaptable and others that aren't I mean, not to pick on a film that I haven't even seen, but all reports of the Goldfinch, which was a really popular,
novel, and it apparently a really terrible flat adaptation again, I don't know, I haven't seen it.
But it's not to say that these don't still happen now.
And ultimately, I think the one thing it's got little to do with unfilmables or not, and it's got everything to do with structure.
And there are definitely really amazing films like Holy Motors, the Leo Carax movie that it feels more like an art piece.
But in the same way, it feels almost like reading a novel where, minute by minute, word by word, I'm engaged and I don't know what any of it means until I'm at the end of it and it's not about,
to say it's not about structure is really unfair because I think there's a lot structurally going on in that film.
But the only thing I can point to Matt is some books lend themselves easily toe adaptation because they are well suited to the Western you know, Hero's journey, archetypal structure.
I think part of it is it's not just like Western archetypal journey is that where kind of tend to be my or have bean.
I think that's changing. Myopic, about how storeys are being told on screen.
So in terms of successful adaptation, flea bag Girl Sleeps with her best friend's boyfriend is a storey that we've seen before, right yet that it's not that plot that makes fleabag so exciting.
It is the way that it is told the fourth Wall, breaking the kind of intimate moments they access the kind of unreliable in the radial, that stuff which is completely connected to the fact that it started life. A za theatre show, right?
It's completely adapted some aspects of that form, and then Trans mutated them into cinema on then.
What's interesting about Season two is that they didn't have the stage play Teo fall back on, but they were able to take those narrative like how the storey is told light is and extend them, using using the language of cinema that is there.
But that is not kind of traditional quote unquote continuity, editing or traditional cinematic storytelling, right, so one of my other favourite adaptations.
And I have not read all the comics by any means Eyes American Splendour, which is a film that I love.
But so what's interesting about American splendour in the way they've chosen to adapt?
It is. It's got the animated comic books kind of like motion comics, intercut with dramatised reenactments, with voiceover provided by the actual people that are in it that it's about, and it is bending the form.
It's completely within the power of cinnamon to do it.
But it's meant to be capturing that spirit of the comics, which is you're seeing someone's rial life rendered on screen, that kind of fictionalised, And they have using the language of cinema to do that, so to look at coming back to Sally in and kind of in the unfilmables thing.
I think it's about people. The idea of this unfilmables is that sometimes people need to think a bit broadly about how they can film stuff to quote crew brick.
If it could be thought or felt, it could be filmed right, and that's actually instead of, like, just like a yeah, it's actually a challenge, you know, it's it's kind of like how do you film this.
Right like it should be a call to arms, about challenging people to push the boundaries of what they're doing and pushed the boundaries of what is acceptable.
Because I think hopefully what people have seen with this prose is what may be seen as non acceptable. Riding is kind of a little bit myopic, and I do write in that reported sparse style.
So I'm not one of those people that's going to be flamboyant.
But hopefully, over these last three episodes you've seen that the boundaries of how you can write stuff for the screen, Khun B. Broad and hopefully that idea of how then you can adapt stuff can be brought as well.
I mean, he is look pointing, putting his finger very firmly on the problem that basically a whole lot of tools that are available to novelists are unfilmables and really unfilmables,
like granting access and context.
Two interior character moments can be really hard to do without creating narrative. Like what we just looked at with dust bunny.
Your decision to move that scene upfront with Ruby having the blood knows something's happened create so much more context.
Re contextualised, YSL the future scenes going forward. And it's like that is the challenge of adaptation. I don't know what to say to Matt other than Yep, it's you're going tohave to do structural storey making choices that takes what is not.
Film a ble from a novel and make it somehow film a bull.
Yeah, but just you saying what I'm saying? In short of words.
So I want to come full circle to bringing quits. Question about how do you know if you're being If she's asking if the unfilmables good, it's like, How do you know if it makes you a wanker or not?
He did. You want to try and, like, get like an aspect of key learnings? Tio, what has turned into an episode of me patting myself on the back and then shooting on you?
Well, look, it's I think it's the lessons that we learn in the 1st 2 episodes.
I think a well learned you know who is Thie unfilmables for? Is it for the readers for the cast and crew?
Is it for the end audience?
Is it universally specific? Is it the most efficient way of conveying what you want to convey?
Those are the questions that I asked myself in assessing the producers notes, and in most instances I ended up agreeing with the producer.
Yeah, I would add to that two aspects to it, which we touched on, which is, if you are prioritising the language over Clary, then you're probably being a wanker, right?
E think that's fair.
The cause. And I think this is coming back to the novelistic thing of mats.
We'd lead to integrate these two questions, which is your language on the page isn't what screenplays are about, right?
Like a functional level. No one's going to read your beautiful big print.
So if you're making the big print, the thing itself, rather than a way to communicate the idea, then you're probably being a wanker.
And there's look his lines, so I can't remember the actual screenplay.
But I think I've read like a horror action script where I was like the last line on this particular page was like, you know, and the sign So it gets whacked in the head and falls, and then you turn the page and just like black,
in the middle of the page, and then you turn the page again.
It was the storey, resuming like I was trying to give you on the page, recreate that experience of the film. We're just coming to Black and I did.
We ended up cutting. It took up too many things. But working on this horror film with his characters, like finally fighting back and The Axe Comes down and it was like and the act's new line Middle comes new line further down something like that.
Well, playing with the actual words on the page a little bit Mohr.
But that probably little bit Winky because it's not actually about clarifying the reed.
It's about even in that case, recreating the emotional experience of cinema. It's just to show how clever we are.
I think there are arguments that that is recreating the experience.
Like the emotional, completely decompressed Oh my God, that acts of swinging down, yes, And my other observation is sometimes, if you have to ask, is this good or am I being a wanker?
Yeah.
The answer is probably your being a wanker, though the rial wankers are never going to ask. So there's that kind of weird Catch 22 right.
I think I came across is more of a writing wanker than you did in this episode.
You're unfilmables air. So Winky, they've got their own podcast.
Ah.
Well, thank you very much for that horrible dissection of my own works.
You a cz always special, thanks to our patrons who bring UME or draft zero more often. If you think we don't release very often as it is, imagine how infrequently we would release without the support of our patrons.
In particular, we would like to thank Jesse Lorry, Jack Smith, Nick MacArthur, Daniel Bernanke, Cary Harris, Chris Walker, Paul Gregory, Sandra Willis and Crab Edmonds.
And thanks to gets double thanks our two amazing interns, Chris Walker and Alex Brown.
I hope you all feel like arguing with either stu willis myself about anything on this episode or anything in general, and you confined many ways of getting in touch with us at our website at draft hyphen zero dot com and the website.
You also find the show notes for this and all our other episodes, as well as links to support us and spread the word for free via rating and review on Apple podcast. Very important for spreading word.
Or if you think that what we do here is worth a dollar or preferably more than a dollar, then you can also find links to our patron. Page two support us getting these episodes to you quicker.
Thanks. And thanks for listening now for back matter.
Well, thanks for the patrons creating this opportunity for me to have a reading off dust bunny.
I won't go into the full history, but obviously training do. A 10 minute silent animated film is pretty hard to get off the ground, and my hope is at some point in my life will need to make it.
It's become actually more personal to me over the last year, even though it's an idea that's been kicking around to be honest for nearly 10 years.
And I'll just given inside of wire one of recording if we got a recording, we've got a version of the Storey and then weakens board it all right so we can get a storyboard to the reading.
And then we can start animating those boards and turning it into a storey real and slowly build it out. And maybe that's all we'll ever be. Is some nice handled images with a voiceover? But e.
I hope you guys find it interesting to listen. It's kind of weirdly exposing in a way that having a finished film out isn't because it's like you're close to the metal,
feels Mohr, exposing.
Dust bunny by Stuart Willis. INTERIOR Ruby's Bedroom Day.
A girl, four, hops around her bedroom.
She wears a homemade bunny hat, complete with fluffy ears. This is Ruby.
Her older brother, Samuel, six, is trying, though not very hard to catch her.
He lands a tip on her shoulder, giggling. She lets herself fall to the ground. She points to her nose and wiggles it like a bunny rabbit.
Samuel knows what this means. He looks over his shoulder to the bedroom entrance to make sure nobody is coming.
He pulls out a black texter from his pocket and starts drawing on Ruby's face.
A dot for her rabbit knows three lines on each cheek for her rabbit whiskers.
Ruby beans, exterior, backyard day, a small backyard, a few shrubs and trees.
Gilded light cracks through the foliage.
Ruby in her bunny hat and face paint skips through the backyard. She stares at the ground as she does.
A small bucket swings by her side.
Something in the grass catches her eye. She grabs it. A wrapped lolly. She adds it to the small pile in her bucket.
She looks around behind her stock. Samuel. He is dressed in a night costume and also carries a bucket,
further behind other parents, Chloe and Brad, both dressed in the flowing robes of a king and a queen, they casually snuggle and watch the Children.
Samuel stops and searches in a flower bed For a moment.
Disappointment crosses his face, Ruby thinks. For a moment, she reaches into her bucket and takes out a small handful of lollies.
She drops him to the ground and then pretends to search the grass.
Samuel strides of behind her and joins the search. He spies the lilies in the grass and plunges to his knees and picks them up.
One by one, he puts a few lollies into his own bucket.
Then he offers a handful to Ruby, who smiles and extends out her bucket with a smile.
Ruby watches Samuel put lollies into her bucket inside the bucket since the well loved purple toy rabbit.
Then a big red drop falls into the bucket and onto the rabbit and another blood ruby whimpers.
Samuel looks up at her. Her nose is bleeding. She starts to cry.
Fear crosses Samuel's face, and he shuts, his eyes cut to black.
Title dust bunny Interior.
Ruby's bedroom day Samuels finger runs across the top of a bedside table.
He draws a simple face in the dust.
He sits on Ruby's bed, neatly made. The debate is pink. A few cuddly toys rest against the pillow.
Samuel swings his legs with boredom.
Sitting on the floor is his mother, Chloe. Spread around her are woven baskets full of toys.
She carefully picks through them, finding a suitable toy.
She dusts it off and carefully placed it in a bag. Among other toys, she pushes the bag towards Samuel.
He looks over the cuddly toys in the bed. He places a few into the bag. He reaches the last toy, the purple toy rabbit.
Samuel hesitates for a moment but doesn't pick up the toy rabbit.
He glances at his preoccupied mother and quickly slides it under his hoody interior exterior family mover. Later, with a click, Chloe harnesses Samuel into his child restraint.
She goes to slide the van door shut, but she stops. She is staring at the empty child restraint next to Samuel.
The moment passes, and she slides the door of the family car shut.
Orange kissed trees are reflected in the window, a single leaf falls as Samuel watches.
It takes on the grace and movement of a dancer.
Interior hospital corridor. Later, hospital doors decorated with details, colourful stickers and some drawings.
The Children's wing by the entrance is a small hygiene station.
Chloe stops and cleans her hand.
Samuel watches on his arm's, still holding the toy rabbit in place. Chloe looks to him for his tone.
Samuel hesitates, then slowly holds out his small hands. Under the dispenser, a flop.
The toy purple rabbit has fallen to the floor.
Chloe swoops up the toy. She looks it over the faded stains of Rubies. Blood.
She shoves it into her handbag, grab Samuel and leads him through the ward doors.
Interior hospital ward. Same.
A small four bed ward, full hushed voices of families and the Children. Some closed curtains.
In the first corner is ruby lying on the hospital bed, some tubes air taped to her.
Sitting by her side. Is Brad there, Father, his face etched with weariness.
Ah, well worn Children's book. In his hand, hearing Samuel and Chloe and to the ward, Brad stands up and heads over Chloe and Brad embrace, but Samuel keeps his distance.
Ruby looks over to smile at him, but Samuel averts his gaze. Her smile breaks.
Samuel drops to the floor and sits cross legged.
He pretends to drive an invisible car on the floor and makes very loud room room sounds.
Some of the parents glanced toward him, embarrassed his parents, both sigh.
Chloe reaches into a bag and gives a toy car to Brad.
Brad walks over to Samuel Interior Hospital playroom. Same Samuel pushes his toy car around the floor through a maze constructed from battered hospital toys.
Brad sits in the room, but he barely watches Samuel. His face is solemn, and he stares vacantly at the window to the greying autumn trees.
Interior Ruby's bedroom. Later, bear untouched.
Ruby's bedroom is collecting dust.
Samuel walks through the room and heads over to her bed. There are no soft toys anywhere.
He takes out a few of the toy boxes and tips them upside down. Toys fall everywhere.
He sorts through them, inspecting the occasional toy. Nothing he likes in the middle of the mess. Samuel sets for a moment.
Then something Jumps passed him, leaving a trail of dust shimmering in the light. It leads to Ruby's bed.
Samuel dashes over, flips up the overhanging covers. He lies down on his stomach and looks underneath.
It's dusty and dark.
He reaches in with his arm, feeling around for something.
Then something brushes his hand. He snaps his hand back, stealing himself. He reaches back in.
He tries to touch whatever is in there but a darts out of range. He pulls out his hand and peers into the darkness.
Two eyes stare back. They blink softly, unsure.
Samuel extends his hand open, palmed the eyes, blink at the hand, a moment of hesitation, and then it jumps out from underneath the bed onto his palm.
It is a bunny made of dust Samuel smiles at the dust bunny. It smiles back.
It hops from his hand and bounces around the room in its wake. It leaves little patches of dust.
Samuel gleefully watches on.
It leaves from the boxes to the wall to the roof.
The dust bunny lands in amongst the toys and knocks them everywhere. It's smile is wide.
Samuel giggles and giggles.
Finally, the dust bunny springs into Samuel's arms. Samuel falls backwards with the bunny laughing.
A shadow falls across the room and annoyed cough.
Standing at the door is Brad. He can see a dust covered Samuel lying on the floor, but he cannot see the dust bunny.
The dust bunny winks at Samuel and leaps under the bed. Samuel gingerly trades over to his annoyed father.
Interior Hospital. Corridor day, the hygiene dispenser. Samuel washes his dusty hands.
The cleanser traces dancing patterns all over his palms.
Interior Hospital ward. Same Ruby's ward.
Brad strides through the entrance to his daughter, and Chloe Samuel stands the door.
Brad turns back to Samuel, gestures him to come in.
Samuel shakes his head. He doesn't want to go in. He points down the corridor, then feigns playing with a toy car. Vroom Brad thinks for a moment, then gives us more nod.
Samuel daughters away from the door and into the corridor, but then halts doubles back. He sneaks up to the ward window.
On tiptoes. He looks over the sell through the window to Ruby's bed.
Ruby and Samuel make the briefest eye contact. Her hair is gone. She is very frail.
Samuel drops down from his tiptoes. Shocked, he slinks away. Down the corridor.
Interior hospital corridor. Later, a corkboard covered in fading photos of child patients, some full of family and laughter.
Other strange and sad, Samuel looks over them slowly, and then his eyes find a photo down the bottom.
As he stares, the image comes alive. Samuels memory ruby lying in the hospital bed, her hair thick and read her smile wide and strong.
Ah, happy birthday balloon. Tied to the end of her bed.
Samuel sits on the bed to his hugging her. Samuel reaches out and touches the picture. It becomes still.
Interior Ruby's bedroom. Later, Samuel bursts into Ruby's room.
The mess is still everywhere. He goes straight to the bed, but there's no bunny, so he searches so more like it's a game of hide and seek.
He lives up one of the overturned toy boxes. There's the dust bunny, hiding underneath a smile, and it leaps unto him, jumping onto his shoulders.
They continue to play in the messy room interior Samuels bedroom night, The soft glow of a nightlight Samuel lies curled up in bed.
The dust bunny snuggled up against him.
The ring of a telephone breaks the silence. A moment conversation there is crying.
The dust bunnies. Long years prop up its expression. Muted.
Samuel stores awake the light flicks on Samuel squints in the darkness.
Chloe stands at the door, her face wet with tears. The dust bunnies, ears droop.
Interior hospital corridor. Night.
Samuel pads down the quiet corridors of the hospital. He's still in his pyjamas, but he's wearing a jacket.
There's a bulge in his jacket. The dust bunny has been zipped up tight. It peeps out over the top.
They go right past the hygiene station and through the doors.
Interior Hospital ward, same Chloe leads him to the ward.
Samuel slows down as he approaches big breath and cautiously, he walks towards Ruby.
Brad is already talking to a nurse as Chloe joins the conversation. Soon she begins sobbing.
Samuel keeps padding towards ruby. Ruby turns to face him. She is pale and listless.
There are small bruises over her arms.
Samuel continues to approach without looking away.
The dust bunny pops its head over the jacket, nose twitching, Ruby smiles faintly at them both.
She can see the dust bunny carefully. Samuel unzips his jacket.
He lifts the dust bunny out and places it alongside Ruby, where it's snuggles into her. Samuel holds her hand.
Breaking away from talking to the nurse. Brad walks over seeing all the dirt over Ruby's bed and arms. He gives an exasperated sigh.
Angrily. He scoops up Samuel and carries him out of the ward.
The dust bunny nudges in closer to Ruby and then looks to Samuel. She'll be okay.
Interior hospital corridor. Same. A pillow and blanket are stacked up one end of a small couch.
Nobody is around. Samuel stares at the wall silence, then the tiny pitter patter of the dust bunny, its face and ears along sadness.
The dust bunny jumps onto Samuel and he looks up slouching towards him or his parents.
Visibly distraught, eyes red, they support each other's wait.
Samuel's face saddens interior. Samuels bedroom. Night.
Samuel lies in his bed, eyes wide open for dust bunny snuggles clothes.
He gets out of bed interior, Ruby's bedroom. Same.
He turns on the light to Ruby's bedroom. It is still a mass.
Quietly, he makes his way to Ruby's bed with a little effort. He pulls back the covers and climbs into her bed. The dust bunny joins him together. They closed their eyes.
Interior Ruby's bedroom. Morning. Samuel is shaken awake by Chloe. She attempts a smile.
The dust bunny ducks its head under the covers.
Interior bathroom. Same a bubble bath.
Samuel quietly plays in the bath water with his toys while Brad washes off the dust.
Brad tries path heartedly toe also play with one of Samuel's toys.
The thunder of a vacuum cleaner comes from deep in the house.
Samuels eyes fill with panic. He goes to leave the bath, but his dad won't let him leave Interior.
Ruby's bedroom. Same with wet hair and fresh clothes. Samuel enters Ruby's room.
It has been completely cleaned. The toy boxes have been put away.
The clothes hung up, the underwear back in the drawers, and it has been vacuumed.
The floor is immaculate.
Samuel hunts everywhere in the cupboard, in the drawers in the toy box is in the bed. He knows this isn't a game.
Finally, he looks under the bed spotless. There is no dust.
There is no dust bunny, just Ruby's home made bunny hat.
Samuel stops. He's on the verge of crying, but he has struck with a thought, and he races out interior, living room.
Same Samuel Yanks the vacuum cleaner out from its cupboard.
He struggles for a moment, pops open the hatch and pulls out the vacuum bag.
Distressed Samuel swings the bag around hits against the floor against the wall. Anything to Aunty the container.
The room becomes thick with a dust cloud. Samuel, Khun just make out something in it. He starts beaming, joy, hearing the commotion, Brad and Chloe and to the living room.
Dust is everywhere.
They look to their beaming boy and then to the dust cloud, and they can finally see what he is saying.
It is not the dust bunny. It is a small dust, a girl just like Ruby.
The dust begins to settle. The dust girl is dissipating.
She waves goodbye to Samuel Samuel waves back. In return, Brad and Chloe watch in stunned silence.
The dust floats away on the air, backlit by the golden morning light.
She has gone, leaving only Samuel, his dirty faces edged with the pale pathways of tears.
Chloe and Brad run over and smother him with hugs. Fade to black.